State Of The Firmware #3 (#353)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/blog/2020-11-05-zmk-sotf-3.md

---
title: "ZMK State Of The Firmware #3"
author: Pete Johanson
author_title: Project Creator
author_url: https://gitlab.com/petejohanson
author_image_url: https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/2001ceff7e9dc753cf96fcb2e6f41110
tags: [SOTF, keyboards, firmware, oss, ble]
---

Welcome to the third ZMK "State Of The Firmware" (SOTF)!

This update will cover all the major activity since [SOTF #2](/blog/2020/09/21/zmk-sotf-2). This edition comes a bit later than planned, but the amount of features and changes will hopefully make it worth it!

## Recent Activity

Here's a summary of the various major changes since last time, broken down by theme:

### Keymaps/Behaviors

Tons of activity related to keymaps, so we'll go into more detail this time.

#### Codes Overhaul

> Contributor [innovaker] _completely_ overhauled the set of available codes you can use in keymaps, and simultaneously has created

Author: Fixed the last one, I believe.

This also laid the foundation for the other keymap related changes that are now available:

#### Modified (Shifted) Codes

Contributor [okke-formsma] added the ability to send additional modifiers along with your base code, e.g.:

```
&kp LC(C)
```

Which will send `Control + c` when pressed. This feature is often used on smaller keyboard to achieve "shifted keycodes", e.g. `LS(N1)` to send a `!`.
To make this easier, in addition to all the normal codes, we know have defines for common shifted codes, e.g. `EXCL` for `!`, `AT` for `@`, etc.

To learn more checkout the [Modifiers](/docs/codes/modifiers) documentation.

#### Simplified Key Press Behavior

In previous versions of ZMK, users needed to be careful to select between the `&kp` and `&cp` behavior in their keymaps, depending on
if the particular keycode they wanted to send was in the "HID consumer page" or not. Forcing user to understand the difference, and get
this right was awkward and error prone.

Contributor [petejohanson] has reduced this complexity, and user can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly

> handle sending the right events to the connect host.

Reviewer: "connected"

### Power Management

> Several important power management features have been added to ZMK, helping save power for many use cases

Reviewer: period at end

and nice!nano that have specialized hardware for this purpose.

With this change, you can add

```
&ext_power EP_TOG
```

to toggle on/off the power to external hardware like RGB underglow or OLEDs. Check out the [external power control](/docs/behavior/power#external-power-control) docs for moore info.

#### Deep Sleep

[petejohanson] has contributed the initial [deep sleep](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/211) support to ZMK. This work also
included some automatic power savings by switching to PORT events on the nrf52 chips, which reduces the idle power draw, even without deep sleep. Deep sleep is currently not turned on by default, but will be soon.

### Miscellaneous

#### Output Selection

[joelspadin] added [output selection](/docs/behavior/output) to allow selecting whether to send output over USB or BLE if both are connected. This should now help avoiding having "double keypresses" when your keyboard is plugged into a host.

#### Bootloader Corruption Fix

> [Nicell] has already [blogged about this](/blog/2020/10/03/bootloader-fix), but for those that missed it, a _major_, and incredibly difficult to pin down bug involving corruption of the bootloader on devices using the Adafruit nrf52 bootloader has been fixed by [Nicell] himself. If you've encountered this bug, flashing the latest firmware should prevent it from reoccurring. Unfortunately, due to the nature of this fix, you will need to repair your keyboard with your hosts, and the fix involve changing where settings are stored in the flash of the controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Nicell] has already [blogged about this](/blog/2020/10/03/bootloader-fix), but for those that missed it, a _major_, and incredibly difficult to pin down bug involving corruption of the bootloader on devices using the Adafruit nrf52 bootloader has been fixed by [Nicell] himself. If you've encountered this bug, flashing the latest firmware should prevent it from reoccurring. Unfortunately, due to the nature of this fix, you will need to re-pair your keyboard with your hosts, as the fix involves changing where settings are stored in the flash of the controller.
```

#### Official USB Product ID

[petejohanson] has gotten an official [USB product ID](https://github.com/openmoko/openmoko-usb-oui/pull/15) assigned to the ZMK Firmware. For anyone looking to uniquely identify a USB device running the ZMK Firmware, you can match on:

- Vendor ID: `0x1d50`
- Product ID: `0x615e`

We are incredibly grateful that Openmoko Inc., in the wake of discontinuing the openmoko projects, has made this an option for OSS projects.

#### Development: Remote Docker Container Integration

> [idan](https://github.com/idan) contributed [VSCode devcontainer integrtion](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/209) to make it easier for developers to build and develop ZMK without having to do complicated local toolchain setup and configuration. This also opens up some amazing future flexibility for things like [GitHub Codespaces](https://twitter.com/ZMKFirmware/status/1315760616779505678?s=20).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[idan](https://github.com/idan) contributed [VSCode devcontainer integration](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/209) to make it easier for developers to build and develop ZMK without having to do complicated local toolchain setup and configuration. This also opens up some amazing future flexibility for things like [GitHub Codespaces](https://twitter.com/ZMKFirmware/status/1315760616779505678?s=20).
```

- NIBBLE in [#292](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/292) - [jaygreco](https://github.com/jaygreco)
- Microdox in [#245](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/245) - [careyk007](https://github.com/careyk007)
- MakerDiary M60 in [#233](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/233) - [megamind4089]
- TGX4 in [#226](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/226) - [mubeenkhan94](https://github.com/mubeenkhan94)
- Querfrency V1 in [#216](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/216) - [noar-t](https://github.com/noar-t)
- Cradio in [#224](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/224) - [davidphilipbarr](https://github.com/davidphilipbarr)
- Romac+ in [#198](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/198) - [reizero00](https://github.com/reizero00)

## New Boards

- MakerDiary nrf52840 M.2 Module in [#233](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/233) - [megamind4089]

## Coming Soon!

Some items listed in the last coming soon section are still under active development.

- OLED work, including battery and USB/BLE connection status - [petejohanson]
- One shot mod/layer behaviors - [okke-formsma]

> - A power profiler page for the website, to help users estimate their battery life for a given keyboard - [Nicell]

Reviewer 2: Maybe the keymap converter from @joelspadin could be listed here too?

Author: Agreeed. Added.

## Statistics

Some statistics of interest for ZMK:

- GitHub
  - 115 Closed PRs
  - 64 Stars
  - 48 Forks
- Discord Chat
  - 186 total registered
- Website (last 30 days)
  - 7.4K page views
  - 474 new users

## Thanks!

Thanks again to the numerous contributors and users who have made working on ZMK such a pleasure!

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe order this list by alphabet?

Author: Sorry, not this list is just Markdown links, so that the bare `[contributor]` references work in the rest of the document. They don't render in the final HTML.

---
title: "ZMK State Of The Firmware #3"
author: Pete Johanson
author_title: Project Creator
author_url: https://gitlab.com/petejohanson
author_image_url: https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/2001ceff7e9dc753cf96fcb2e6f41110
tags: [SOTF, keyboards, firmware, oss, ble]
---

Welcome to the third ZMK "State Of The Firmware" (SOTF)!

This update will cover all the major activity since [SOTF #2](/blog/2020/09/21/zmk-sotf-2). This edition comes a bit later than planned, but the amount of features and changes will hopefully make it worth it!

## Recent Activity

Here's a summary of the various major changes since last time, broken down by theme:

### Keymaps/Behaviors

Tons of activity related to keymaps, so we'll go into more detail this time.

#### Codes Overhaul

> [innovaker] _completely_ overhauled the set of available codes you can use in keymaps, and simultaneously has created

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[innovaker] _completely_ overhauled the set of available codes for keymaps, and simultaneously has created
```

> _beautiful_ [documentation](/docs/codes) to help users see the available codes, and also understand if they are supported on their particular operating system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_beautiful_ [documentation](/docs/codes) to help users visualize the codes, and also understand if they are supported on their particular operating system.
```

This also laid the foundation for the other keymap related changes that are now available.

#### Modified (Shifted) Codes

[okke-formsma] added the ability to apply modifiers to a code, e.g.:

```
&kp LC(C)
```

> Which sends `Control + c` when pressed. This feature is often used on smaller keyboards to achieve "shifted keycodes", e.g. `LS(N1)` to send a `!`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which sends `Control + c` when pressed. This feature is often used on smaller keyboards to achieve "shifted keycodes", e.g. `LS(N1)` to send a `!`.
```

To make this easier, in addition to all the normal codes, we now have defines for common shifted codes, e.g. `EXCL` for `!`, `AT` for `@`, etc.

To learn more, check out the [Modifiers](/docs/codes/modifiers) documentation.

#### Simplified Key Press Behavior

> In previous versions of ZMK, users needed to be careful to select between the `&kp` and `&cp` behavior in their keymaps, depending on

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In previous versions of ZMK, users needed to be careful to select between the `&kp` and `&cp` behaviors in their keymaps, depending on
```

> if the particular keycode they wanted to send was in the "HID consumer page" or not. Forcing user to understand the difference, and get

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
whether the particular keycode they wanted to send was in the "HID consumer page" or not. Forcing users to understand the difference, and get
```

> if the particular keycode they wanted to send was in the "HID consumer page" or not. Forcing user to understand the difference, and get

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
if the particular keycode they wanted to send was in the "HID consumer page" or not. Forcing user to understand the difference and get
```
English is a dumb language and I am by no means an expert, but I think the comma here is unnecessary. The first time I read this, the comma got me to try to parse "and get this right was awkward and error prone" as a standalone phrase, and I was confused until I re-read it a couple times.

Author: Thanks. Fixed.

this right was awkward and error prone.

> [petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity. Users can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity. Users can now simply use `&kp` with all available codes and ZMK will properly
```

> Contributors [petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity. Users can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity. Users can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly
```

Author: Fixed.

> Contributors [petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity, and user can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Contributors [petejohanson] and [innovaker] have reduced this complexity.  Users can now simply use `&kp` will all available codes and ZMK will properly
```

handle sending the right events to the connected host.

### Power Management

Several important power management features have been added to ZMK, helping save power for many use cases.

#### BLE Battery Level Reporting

[Nicell] added the necessary [driver](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/293) and [core code](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/306) to send BLE battery level notifications to hosts that support displaying them. Testing seems to show this works with Windows and GNOME, but macOS does not display the battery info.

#### External Power Control

> [megamind4089] added a new [driver](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/242) and [behavior](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/258) to allow users to toggle (on/off) the external power supplied by boards such as the nrfMicro

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[megamind4089] added a new [driver](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/242) and [behavior](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/258) to allow users to toggle (on/off) the external power supplied by boards such as the nRFMicro
```

> [megamind4089] added a new [driver](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/242) and [behavior](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/258) to allow user to toggle on/off the external power supplied by boards like the nrfMicro

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[megamind4089] added a new [driver](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/242) and [behavior](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/258) to allow users to toggle (on/off) the external power supplied by boards such as the nrfMicro
```

and nice!nano that have specialized hardware for this purpose.

With this change, you can add

```
&ext_power EP_TOG
```

to toggle (on/off) the power to external hardware like RGB underglow or OLEDs. Check out the [external power control](/docs/behavior/power#external-power-control) docs for more info.

#### Deep Sleep

[petejohanson] has contributed the initial [deep sleep](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/211) support to ZMK. This work also

> included some automatic power savings by switching to PORT events on the nrf52 chips, which reduces the idle power draw, even without deep sleep. Deep sleep is currently not turned on by default, but will be soon.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
included some automatic power savings by switching to PORT events on the nRF52 chips, which reduces the idle power draw, even without deep sleep. Deep sleep is currently not turned on by default, but will be soon.
```

### Miscellaneous

#### Output Selection

[joelspadin] added [output selection](/docs/behavior/outputs) to allow selecting whether to send output over USB or BLE if both are connected. This should now help avoid having "double keypresses" when your keyboard is plugged into a host.

#### Bootloader Corruption Fix

> [Nicell] has already [blogged about this](/blog/2020/10/03/bootloader-fix), but for those that missed it, a _major_, and incredibly difficult to pin down bug involving corruption of the bootloader on devices using the Adafruit nrf52 bootloader has been fixed by [Nicell]. If you've encountered this bug, flashing the latest firmware should prevent it from reoccurring. Unfortunately, due to the nature of this fix, you will need to re-pair your keyboard with your hosts, as the fix involves changing where settings are stored in the flash of the controller.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Nicell] has already [blogged about this](/blog/2020/10/03/bootloader-fix), but for those that missed it, a _major_, and incredibly difficult to pin down bug involving corruption of the bootloader on devices using the Adafruit nRF52 bootloader has been fixed by [Nicell]. If you've encountered this bug, flashing the latest firmware should prevent it from reoccurring. Unfortunately, due to the nature of this fix, you will need to re-pair your keyboard with your hosts, as the fix involves changing where settings are stored in the flash of the controller.
```

> [Nicell] has already [blogged about this](/blog/2020/10/03/bootloader-fix), but for those that missed it, a _major_, and incredibly difficult to pin down bug involving corruption of the bootloader on devices using the Adafruit nrf52 bootloader has been fixed by [Nicell] himself. If you've encountered this bug, flashing the latest firmware should prevent it from reoccurring. Unfortunately, due to the nature of this fix, you will need to re-pair your keyboard with your hosts, as the fix involves changing where settings are stored in the flash of the controller.

Reviewer 4: > [Nicell] himself

This could be misinterpreted as Nicell was the one that introduced the bug or wrote the bootloader.

- Product ID: `0x615e`

We are incredibly grateful that Openmoko Inc., in the wake of discontinuing the openmoko projects, has made this an option for OSS projects.

#### Development: Remote Docker Container Integration

[idan](https://github.com/idan) contributed [VSCode devcontainer integration](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/209) to make it easier for developers to build and develop ZMK without having to do complicated local toolchain setup and configuration. This also opens up some amazing future flexibility for things like [GitHub Codespaces](https://twitter.com/ZMKFirmware/status/1315760616779505678?s=20).

There's some follow up tweaks necessary for better supporting using this with user config repositories, which will be available soon.

## New Shields

- Reviung41 in [#297](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/297) - [Nicell]
- Boardsource 3x4 in [#296](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/296) - [neegool](https://github.com/neegool)
- NIBBLE in [#292](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/292) - [jaygreco](https://github.com/jaygreco)
- Microdox in [#245](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/245) - [careyk007](https://github.com/careyk007)

> - MakerDiary M60 in [#233](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/233) - [megamind4089]

Reviewer 4: > [megamind4089]

Throughout the post, some names have links, but some don't?

Author: Alternate format for links in Markdown. These use the links at the end of the MD file.

Author: This saves me from repeating the same link a bunch of times

- TGX4 in [#226](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/226) - [mubeenkhan94](https://github.com/mubeenkhan94)
- Querfrency V1 in [#216](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/216) - [noar-t](https://github.com/noar-t)
- Cradio in [#224](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/224) - [davidphilipbarr](https://github.com/davidphilipbarr)
- Romac+ in [#198](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/198) - [reizero00](https://github.com/reizero00)

## New Boards

- MakerDiary nrf52840 M.2 Module in [#233](https://github.com/zmkfirmware/zmk/pull/233) - [megamind4089]

## Testing

> There has been an _amazing_ amount of testing from various users as we develop new features. In particular, we'd like to call out [tominabox1](https://github.com/tominabox1) who has been tireless in providing detailed and thorough testing of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There has been an _amazing_ amount of testing from various users as we develop new features. In particular, we'd like to give a shoutout to [tominabox1](https://github.com/tominabox1) who has been tireless in providing detailed and thorough testing of
```

Reviewer 4: I believe `call out` means to highlight as unacceptable behavior.

> There has been an _amazing_ amount of testing from various users as we have been developing new features. In particular, we'd like to call out [tominabox1](https://github.com/tominabox1) who has been tireless in providing detailed and thorough testing of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There has been an _amazing_ amount of testing from various users as we develop new features. In particular, we'd like to call out [tominabox1](https://github.com/tominabox1) who has been tireless in providing detailed and thorough testing of
```

changes as they are being developed.

## Coming Soon!

Some items listed in the last coming soon section are still under active development.

- OLED work, including battery and USB/BLE connection status - [petejohanson]
- One shot mod/layer behaviors - [okke-formsma]
- A power profiler page for the website, to help users estimate their battery life for a given keyboard - [Nicell]
- A keymap converter to automatically update keymaps to the new codes and use of `&kp` everywhere - [joelspadin]

## Statistics

> Some statistics of interest for ZMK:

Reviewer 4: I may not be clear whether these statistics are:
 - since the last SOTF
 - since the start of the project
 - last 30 days (as per website)

Author: They are for lifetime unless otherwise noted. Let me add a note about that for those.

Author: Updated, added a note about them being lifetime numbers.
